[MUSIC]
This lecture is about conditional
operation inside a C program.
So if you have a program with no
conditionals, that's unusual, but you can
have a program with no conditionals,
where it just executes line after line.
But a lot of time,
most of the time in programs,
you wanna have conditionals where you
execute some code under some conditions,
and execute other code
under other conditions.
So that's what we're talking about here,
how you implement conditionals inside C.
So the main conditional statement
is going to be an if statement.
And I, we're showing two forms
of an if statement right here.
Let's take the one on the left.
If expression is true, then execute
statement1, else execute statement2.
So you'll notice after the word if,
there's an expression in parentheses.
That expression is evaluated at run time.
If it turns out to be true,
then statement1 is executed.
Else, statement2 is executed.
And note that you don't
have to have a statement2.
You could just say if expression
statement1 and leave it at that, no else.
Then if the expression is
true it executes statement1,
if it's not true it executes nothing,
it just moves on to the next statement.
So on the other side you got if and
then an else if, this is an extension.
So this is sort of a chain,
a series of if statements.
So you can if expression1,
then execute statement1.
Else, if expression2, execute statement2.
And you can continue this, right?
You can say else, if expression3,
execute statement3 and so on.
You could continue that as long as you
want, and at the end you typically put
an else statement, else statement3,
or in this case, statement3.
So what happens is first
it checks expression1.
If that's true,
then it executes statement1 and
it's done with the entire if statement.
If that's not true then it goes to
the next expression and checks it.
And then if that's not true,
it goes to the next.
So it goes down the list of expressions
until it hits one that's true.
As soon as it hits one that's true it
executes the appropriate statement and
then it exits the if statement.
And if all else fails it
hits the else at the end.
Which, by the way, the else is optional.
You can just leave out
the else if you wanted to.
So, those are two forms of if statements,
if and else if also.
Here's an example, a conditional example.
We've got a main.
So, we declare an integer x,
and we set it equal to 1,
which we can do on the same line,
int x = 1.
Then, if x = 1, which it is,
printf("Correct"),
else printf("Incorrect").
So that's a typical if statement.
Now one thing to note about this if
statement is that, so statement1 and
statement2.
Statement1 we'll call printf("Correct").
Statement2 is printf("Incorrect").
These two statements they
are single statements, so
if x = 1 we're executing in
this case only one statement.
But you could execute many.
There are many cases
where you might say look,
if x = 1 I wanna do 10 statements or
something like that.
To do that, you can do that, but
you've gotta use curly brackets
to group the statements.
So notice here,
there are no curly brackets,
there's a curly bracket that defines main,
one at the top, one at the bottom, but
there are no curly brackets
inside the if statement.
But if I wanted to have multiple
statements executed, if x = 1,
then I would put curly brackets in.
So I would say if x = 1,
then I have an open curly bracket,
then I have as many statements as I wanted
then I have a closed curly bracket.
And then I can say else
printf("Incorrect") okay.
So you can have many statements
executed on the true or
false sides of that if statement.
As long as you group
them in curly brackets.
Now switch, it's another type
of conditional branch statement,
and it's useful in a lot of cases.
What it does is,
it basically takes a variable,
some expression, okay and
the expression is evaluated.
So you switch against some expression.
The expression in
parenthesis is evaluated,
as compared to a set of
constant expressions.
So a common way to do this is
say you got a variable x, right.
And you know it's gonna equal either 0,
1, 2, or 3.
And under each condition,
you wanna do a different thing.
So, you could say switch x,
the expression would be x itself.
And then you'd say case 0, statement,
whatever, statement1, case1, case2.
And so the constant expression,
case0, case1,
case2, that's compared to
whatever the expression is, okay?
And if it matches,
if the expression evaluates to 0 and
you have a case0,
then statement1 is executed.
If you have a case1 and
the expression matches that,
then statement2 is executed, and so on.
And default is optional, it's if nothing
matches, you execute the default.
It's like the else at the end of an if
statement, if else if statement.
Actually a switch is an alternative
to using ifs and else ifs.
If else if,
else if is an alternative way to do this.
So here's an example of a switch.
And it's important to use these
break statements in the switch, but
I'll talk about that in a second.
So let's say I have my switch, switch x.
X is my expression.
Notice there are three cases,
case 0, case 1, case 2.
And what'll happen is x is gonna
be first matched, compared to 0.
If it matches,
then it executes that statement y = 1.
But if it doesn't match that,
then x is gonna be compared to case 1, and
then it's gonna be compared to 2,
so compared to 0, 1, 2.
And one thing about a switch though,
that's a little bit annoying,
frankly, is that it,
so it does what I said.
It'll start off, it'll take x,
compare it to 0, right?
Now, if x doesn't match 0, then it'll go
to the next case and try comparing x to 1.
But if x does match 0, it'll execute
every statement from that point on.
So that means in the way
that this is written if
x = 0 it'll say case 0,
it'll match that case.
It'll assign y equal to 1.
But then notice it'll continue execution.
It'll go on to the next statement,
y = 2, and execute that also.
A very weird and
annoying thing about switches in C.
Cuz usually that's not what you want.
Usually you want these cases to be
mutually exclusive, meaning if x = 0,
you execute case 0 and that's that.
If x = 1, you execute case 1 and
that's that.
You like them to be separate.
But that's not how C is.
So in order to make it that way,
which is a very common thing people
want to do you use a break statement.
Now I've put one in there,
normally I would put
one break statement in every case but
in this case I put one in there.
So let's say if you look at case 1,
let's say x = 1.
So x matches case 1 so
the next statement is y = 2.
So executes that y = 2 statement.
Then after that there's a break.
What a break does in a switch
is it says stop right now and
do not execute anything
else after this line.
And it jumps out of the case.
So out of the switch
statement all together.
So what will happen is if x = 1 it'll
execute y = 2, it'll hit the break, and
it won't reach that case 2.
It'll just skip straight
to the end of the switch.
So it's very common in a switch statement
if you have 3 cases like this, case 0,
case 1, case 2, you put 3 breaks.
You'll put a break at the end of case 0,
a break at the end of case 1 and
a break at the end of case 2.
Actually, case 2 you don't
technically need a break since
it's at the end already, all right?
So you put a break at
the end of case 0 and case 1,
that's a very common way to
use a break inside a switch.
So be wary of switches when you use them,
because if you don't use the break, then
if x matches 0, case 0, then it'll also
execute case 1 as if it matched that too.
And that can be confusing sometimes.
Sometimes that's what you want,
but just be aware.
Thank you.
[MUSIC].